Benchmark indexes using metadata rows matching published FASTA files (#905)
naobservatory/mgs-workflow: .claude/skills/benchmark-index/SKILL.md

`--old`, and `--out` (Step 1). Coverage annotations are derived from `new_index`
itself, so no repo checkout is needed.

Both indexes must publish `output/results/virus-genomes-masked.fasta.gz`, which
the script reads to compare the two genome DBs by membership; `new_index` must
additionally publish `virus-genome-metadata-raw.tsv.gz` and
`input/host-infection-overrides.json`. An index whose objects have been
transitioned to Glacier cannot be staged at all and so cannot be used on either
side — the resulting `Could not stage ...` abort is that, not a script defect.
Restoring the objects, or picking a still-warm reference index, is the fix.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  --out <output-dir>
```

Use **absolute** paths for `--out` (e.g. `/tmp/bench-...`). Takes a couple of
minutes, most of it spent staging each index's genome DB FASTA — the largest
file in an index, and read twice per side: once for its content metrics and
once for its sequence IDs. If `<outdir>` already contains benchmark outputs,
reuse them only if the user asked you to avoid rerunning; otherwise rerun so

> the reference freshness checks are current.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use **absolute** paths for `--out` (e.g. `/tmp/bench-...`). Takes about 60
seconds. If `<outdir>` already contains benchmark outputs, reuse them only if
the user asked you to avoid rerunning; otherwise rerun so the reference
freshness checks are current.
```

Reviewer: no unnecessary churn please.

- `sizes_summary.json`: counts of top-level output entries that grew, shrank,
  or stayed unchanged.
- `genomes_summary.json`: headline genome/taxonomy counts — lost/gained totals,
  per-reason counts, all-lost / all-gained species, reassignments, net delta,
  taxa added/removed, and the four metadata/genome-DB agreement counts read in
  Step 2a. If `lost_total` or `gained_total` is zero, §3.2 / §3.3 collapse to
  "No genome IDs lost/gained".
- `index_versions.json`: the pipeline version each index was built with
  (`pipeline_version_old`, `pipeline_version_new`), read from the index's own
  published `pyproject.toml`, or from the bare `pipeline-version.txt` older

>   indexes published instead. `null` means the index records neither.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `index_versions.json`: the pipeline version each index was built with
  (`pipeline_version_old`, `pipeline_version_new`).
```

  treat an implausibly large count as that, not as vintage.
- `metadata_rows_not_in_fasta_new` — a finding. Either the candidate was also
  built with **3.2.2.0 or earlier**, or reconciliation has regressed. Say which,
  using `pipeline_version_new`. The candidate's published metadata describes
  genomes it does not ship, so anything reading that file as the genome set —
  including this script, before it restricts to DB membership — is wrong about
  the candidate.
- `fasta_ids_without_metadata_old` / `_new` — a defect on either side, whatever
  the vintage, and the more serious direction: RUN resolves `genome_id` to taxid
  through the metadata, so a sequence with no row is a reference RUN cannot
  attribute. Raise it in §5 and carry it into §Recommendations.

Report all four in §5 whenever any is non-zero, with the two pipeline versions
alongside so a reader can tell "expected for its vintage" from "regression".
The counts are measured from the index itself and are authoritative; the version
only sets the expectation. A `-dev` version is mid-cycle and settles nothing on
its own, so judge those indexes on the counts alone.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2a - Check metadata against the genome DB

An index's published metadata and its published genome DB FASTA should describe
the same set of genomes. Four counts in `genomes_summary.json` measure whether
they do, per side:

- `metadata_rows_not_in_fasta_old` / `_new` — expected to be non-zero for any index built
  with pipeline version **3.2.2.0 or earlier** (check `index_versions.json`),
  which published metadata that was never reconciled to the genome DB. This case is
  historical and benign if it's a few percentage points relative to the total metadata rows in `sizes.tsv`: note it in §5 and move on. For indexes built with later versions or for large changes,
  this is a significant finding. Raise it in §5 and carry it into §Recommendations.
- `fasta_ids_without_metadata_old` / `_new` — a defect on either side for any pipeline version,
  and the more serious direction: RUN resolves `genome_id` to taxid
  through the metadata, so a sequence with no row is a reference RUN cannot
  attribute. Raise it in §5 and carry it into §Recommendations.

Report all four in §5 whenever any is non-zero, with the two pipeline versions
alongside so a reader can tell "expected for its pipeline version" from "regression".

```

`genomes_gained_categorized.tsv`, and `genomes_summary.json` reason-count
objects. The template uses them as the §3.1 row labels.

"Lost" and "gained" throughout mean membership of the set of genomes an index
both ships *and* describes — its metadata restricted to the sequences present
in its own genome DB FASTA — not membership of the metadata alone. A genome an
index's metadata described but never shipped is therefore neither lost nor
gained when it disappears from the metadata, and one that enters the DB is a
gain even if both indexes' metadata always listed it.

"Ships and describes" and plain genome DB membership coincide unless an index
ships a sequence with no metadata row, which `fasta_ids_without_metadata_*`
counts. Such a sequence carries no
taxid or assembly for the categorizer to work from, so it cannot appear in
either table: if the old index described it and the new one does not, it is
reported lost even though the new index still ships it. When that count is
non-zero on either side, say so in §5 and treat the loss and gain figures as

> unreliable for those specific IDs.

Reviewer: Do we expect to be reporting the specific IDs that are mismatched between the FASTA and the metadata from the script? I thought the script only returned counts for these. Correct the prose here if needed.

> unreliable for those specific IDs.

Reviewer: I'm not convinced we need these two paragraphs at all. Consider whether they are important or whether they can be removed (my preference) or trimmed down.

Reviewer: I think we can remove them: a non-0 `fasta_ids_without_metadata_*` will already flag a major finding.

- `hard_excluded`: build-time leaf taxid or an ancestor is in `viral_taxids_exclude_hard` in the new build.
- `reassigned_to_excluded`: build-time leaf taxid differs from the old leaf taxid and the new leaf/species rollup is no longer surveilled.
- `infection_status_demotion`: build-time leaf taxid equals the old leaf taxid and the leaf/species rollup is no longer surveilled.

> - `other`: present, current, surveilled, yet absent from the new genome DB — so the sequence was removed after its metadata row was written, which no bucket names. Sequence-header pattern exclusion (`ref/hv_patterns_exclude.txt`) is the mechanism today. Should be near zero; if not, investigate sequence-level filtering in `MAKE_VIRUS_GENOME_DB`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `other`: present, current, surveilled, yet absent from the new gid set. Should be near zero; if not, investigate downstream sequence-level filtering in `MAKE_VIRUS_GENOME_DB`.
```
